---
layout: section
---
##Issues

Majority of comments deal with logistics.  Cadre logistics concern issues
affecting the cadre of instructors.  Course logistics concern presentation of
the course.

Deficiencies in logistics planning primarily cost instructors time in trip
preparation.  This time was billed to the ONR-RC program in the form of IDT/ATP.
Had logistics been more streamlined, the IDT/ATP funds could have been used to
support other projects in ONR.

Infrastructure realities in Ghana should also be considered for cadre
situational awareness.

Strong recommendations in bold.

##Cadre Logistics

Administrative requirements to enter AFRICOM AOR were being identified
periodically throughout the pre-deployment phase.  Multiple versions of guidance
(in pdf format) were released during this phases, with additional requirements
promulgated via e-mail as the departure date.  While an officer was assigned the
duties to coordinate these logistics, it appears as an observer, that she did
not receive complete information from her AFRICOM points of contact.

The incremental identification of requirements cost a small amount of additional
time for analysis of the requirements, redundant reporting and caused a small
amount of frustration.  Regardless, the trip went off as planned.

COCOMs are large organizations, but there should be an office dedicated to
tracking administrative requirements for personnel entering the AOR. **Recommend
that an officer who is part of the instructor cadre be given the collateral duty
to liaise with the COCOM and create one set of guidance in checklist form for
all training, medical and administrative requirements.  Allow me to reiterate:
one DEFINITIVE LIST in CHECKLIST FORM.**  This will allow the instructors to do as
little thinking about administration as possible and focus on course content
preparation.

Why instructor cadre officer?  More skin in the game.

If possible, the admin-logistics officer should have civilian employment at a
COCOM or government agency.  This will make coordination much easier for obvious
reasons.

##Passport/Visa

ONR does not support reservists in obtaining official passports or obtaining
visas.  As a result, the instructor cadre was left to their own devices to
obtain passports and visas.  This cost instructors a large amount of time as
they independently researched requirements, filled out forms, etc.

Original guidance was to send the visa application to a drilling reservist in
Pensacola who happened to have the credentials to submit a visa request to the
DoD office.  I did not have confidence in this guidance and expended a large
amount of time (billed to ONR) to discover the right way to do this.

The DoD passport/visa office is at Ft. Belvoir.  Each command is (required)
supposed to have a passport/visa specialist to handle travel for their unit.
Fortunately, I already had an official passport from previous active duty.  I
had no experience with visas; my previous command handled this for all
travelers.  Ideally, my reserve center should have processed my visa
application.  The training office at NOSC Raleigh took the visa for action, but
got back to me over a week later, admitting they did not have the ability to
submit my visa.

I discovered the visa guidance for Ghana on the DoD site and called the office
so that I could get a plain language explanation of how the process worked.  One
detail was that Ghana required a letter of invitation to enter the country; we
did not have these letters!  Swift action by the project officer resulted in
obtaining the letters only 5 weeks prior to our departure date.

Also fortunately, I work at a COCOM (USCENTCOM).  Despite the fact I am a
contractor, because of *personal contacts* from prior active duty, the
passport/visa office at USCENTCOM processed my visa application for Ghana.

Everyone did receive their visas in time for the trip, but the process was time
consuming in my case and likely time consuming for the others.  Had one thing
gone wrong, it is possible one or more instructors would not have been able to
board the flight.  At the very least more time would have been needed (and paid
for by ONR).

**Strongly recommend that ONRG provide guidance to project officers for OCONUS
missions and process passports and visas.  This would result in lower costs and
reduced risks for the ONR-RC program.**

##Packing list

The reality of services in Ghana were not entirely clear during the leadup to
the mission.  Ghanaian infrastructure is intermittent in nature, and this
includes running water and electricity.  The water is not potable. We were
requested to bring some items (deet, first aid kit, signal mirror?), but no
coherent packing list.  Recommend a packing list for non-western countries be
prepared for future participants.  A non-exhaustive list includes:

- Hand sanitizer
- Deet
- Sunscreen
- Mosquito netting
- zip ties
- Toilet paper
- paper towels
- Field wipes (huge wet wipes for cleaning whole body)
- Flashlight
- Duct tape
- bungee cord
- ziplock bags
- anti-bacterial soap
- small basin/canteen for shaving (with bottled water)
- plug converters (power converters for non-electronics)
- bath towels
- hand towels
- ear plugs

Input from other officers can round out this list.

##Currency Exchange

We received guidance that a bank branch inside the US Embassy would exchange our
dollars for the local currency (cedi, GH).  When we arrived at 1530, we were
informed that the Embassy was closed at 1200 that day.  On Saturday, we
attempted to exchange money at an Ecobank (pan-African bank) and were informed
that \"the platform\" was down.  On Monday, we attempted to change dollars for
cedi again and were told that there were \"computer problems\".  The bank advised
us to go to the \"Foreign Exchange Bureau\".

Our cab driver took us to the foreign exchange bureau that from the outside
looked like a pawnshop in a really bad neighborhood.  Inside, two casually
dressed gentlemen exchanged our currency from behind a barred counter.  They
issued receipts and everything was in order.  They were running out of cedi.  We
exchanged roughly $2500 USD and the last $200 consisted of GH 5 notes.  Roughly
$1.60/per note.

The exchange rate was based on the denomination of the bill.  When we were
there, $100 and $50 got a 3:1 cedi to dollar.  $20 got 2.85:1.  I had an old
$100 bill and they offered only 2.8:1.  I did not exchange my old $100.

On the ride back to the University, our knowledgeable cab driver explained that
the banks were no longer exchanging foreign currency.  Some sort of political
issue involving use of foreign currency for B2B transactions.  Not sure if this
was a temporary issue that will be resolved in the future.

What is staggering is that the bank lied to us.  Twice.

ATMs are available on campus, but their operation was not consistent.  We were
advised that credit cards are not typically used in Ghana. The amount of money
to bring was based on lodging costs for the student housing (40 CD a night).
For some of us, this was an inaccurate measure.  See lodging.

**Recommend bringing emergency cash funds to areas like Ghana where credit cards
are not recommended and ATM use unreliable.**

##Lodging

Our lodging was set arranged in the student housing hall \"Frances Sey\", one of 4
cavernous structures on the southern boundary of campus.  The commemoration
plaque suggested the structure was only 2.5 years old.  If true, it suffered
from lack of maintenance since that time.

The rooms had a number of maintenance issues, including clogged sink,
broken toilet seat, broken cabinetry.  When the water worked, it provided a weak
trickle of water.  We suffered a two day water outage at one point.  Electricity
also went out on at least four occasions.

The student lodging had no air conditioning and all rooms had vermin of one
variety or another.  I had ants, roaches and a large lizard.  I welcomed the
lizard, as it likely kept the insect population down.

Timing was also an unfortunate factor.  It was the end of the term and students
were in the process of moving out and it was not always orderly. There was
activity at all hours and discarded trash build up in large mounds in the
hallways for several days until it was all disposed of.

The student housing was also exceptionally noisy.  See \"ear plugs\" in suggested packing list above.

I and another instructor moved to the guest lodge during our duty in Ghana.  The
other instructors moved to the guest lodge for one or more nights throughout the
2.5 weeks.  The guest lodge featured A/C, hot water, reliable internet, linens
and on one occasion a large gray rat.  I was moved to a different room after I
reported the rat.

The rationale of staying in the student housing was for more frequent
student-instructor interaction.  The reality was that the instructors and
students were spread out over a very large building with intermittent services.
This situation had a more severe impact on the instructors ability to
collaborate outside of class.

##Dining

Ghanian food, with the exception of Jolof rice and a black fish-based sauce, is
bland.  Mostly starches (rice, cassava, beans, plantain) with small amounts of
meat (chicken/fish) are consumed.  Few fruits and vegetables are served.

Infrastructure problems extend to food distribution.  A menu at a restaurant is
a list of *possibilities*, not a list of what they actually have that night.
The Ghanian kitchens seem to use a FIFO structure.  A table of diners will not
receive their food at the same time, but when it is ready.  You will also wait
an indeterminate period of time for your meal.  I once waited over an hour for a
small pizza.

Additionally, the waitress will never come to your table unless she is taking
your order or delivering food.  **Expect to spend a longer amount of time dining
than you would in the US.**

We primarily ate at the guest centre dining room, a cafeteria near the computer
science building and a restaurant called \"Time Out\".  Meals ran from 5GHC to
20GHC, though I once paid 30GHC for a really bad pizza.

##Ghanaian Culture (caveat: I am not an anthropologist!)

English is the official language, but in reality Ghanaians learn a tribal
language and English in school.  Many customer service personnel have weak
English skills.

There are cultural differences.  A small retail store might not be open during
business hours because the operator is running an errand.

The people seem very honest at their core; Carl left 60 GHC in his pocket and the
laundress returned it.  Places we ate at frequently on at least one occasion
told us to pay the next day for a small item because they did not want to make
change for a large bill. Taxi drivers provided accurate fare information and
directions from people on the street were accurate.  However, there were
situations where questions were occasionally answered dishonestly.

Occasionally, answers were given that were untrue in situations where we would
be given bad news.  When trying to determine when the laundry would reopen, the
laundress told me she would be there in a half hour.  When I called back 40
minutes later, it was clear she had no intention of returning for the day.
Whether this was a language issue or a cultural issue was never clarified.
Earlier, I described how bank employees lied about their reasons for not
exchanging currency.

##Transportation

The road system appears to be inadequate for the number of vehicles using it.
The driver from the university picked us up on Friday afternoon (~1430) and we
observed first-hand the variety and volume of traffic.  A day trip to Cape Coast
demonstrated that leaving early on a Saturday (~0700), it still took 90 minutes
to get out of Accra.

**Allow ample time to get from point A to point B.**

There are numerous taxis.  The few rides I took via taxi were very reasonable.
There are no meters in taxis, but it broke down to about 4GHC per kilometer.  For
longer trips, the rate was lower.

Instructors and student lived on campus.  The campus is very large, slightly
larger than 2 km x 2 km.  Frances Sey Hall to the computer lab was 1.9 km.

##Telecommunications

Communications were fair in Ghana.  Signal strength on local carriers was
consistent in urban areas and many of the students had smart phones.  One US
person I met at the airport, who has been traveling to Ghana annually for the
last decade told me that his Ghanaian smart phone has performed very well on his
most recent trip.

The instructor cadre did not have robust telecommunications.  Only Carl Pearson
and I had reasonably priced international plans (in my case free texts and 0.20
a minute) for our phones and enjoyed the ability to call and text each other.
Another instructor had text ability only.  The other two instructors did not
have portable telecommunications.

This occasionally caused some inconvenience.  In the case of an emergency, this
situation could have had negative consequences.  **Strongly recommend that future
instructor cadres have voice and text communication between all participants.**
One option is to purchase local SIM cards for all instructor telecommunication
devices.  The other is for all instructors to purchase international plans for
the duration of their trip.

##Course Logistics

###IT Infrastructure

Computer Lab/Classroom consisted of 35 workstations, but about 20% of the
workstations were inoperative or did not have internet access (Carl, did you
record an exact count? -- yes, there were 6 rows of 5 machines each, for 30
total; there were 10 machines that were inoperable or without network
connection).  The workstations were loaded with windows 7.  They were not ready
for use.

The University of Ghana does not appear to have a consistent sysadmin policy.
Accounts used by students had administrator privileges.  Each workstation had a
different mix of superfluous programs (entertainment mostly) loaded.  These
programs were (eventually) removed.

Students surfing the web and downloading programs with admin privileges
introduce a lot of malware.  The freeware program, "Malware Bytes", was used to
scan each machine.  A staggering amount of malware was discovered.  One machine
had over 5000 malware objects, but the typical amount fell into the 50-200 range
of malware objects.  The malware was of all types: adware, rootkits, spam
generators, keyloggers, click fraud, etc.  As malware was removed, interesting
things were discovered.  My favorite was the malware that kept pinging its home
servers in Russia for instructions, which were then being blocked.

Windows updates were not applied or even turned on most of the machines.  Much
time and effort (the entire weekend) was spent updating windows, removing
malware and superfluous programs from machines in the lab.  This was a
prerequisite before the VMWare and Linux distribution were loaded on each
machine.  As a result, the linux features of all the workstations were not fully
configured before the course began.

This experience leads to two different recommendations.  Preferred in bold:

**Advance Team.  Assuming future venues are similar; send two IT-savvy instructors
2 days in advance to configure the lab for use by the instructors and students.
Also ensure living arrangements/transportation/verify telecommunications.**

Train the staff.  Provide instruction to the educational institution staff on IT
admin.  This might be more valuable long term, as the work we did configuring
machines will swiftly be nullified by the current set of bad practices.  The
idea is that the local staff can configure the machines and maintain them in the
future.  Cultural differences and sensitivities may prove a challenge here.

###Classroom

Instructors presented lessons using a university provided projector and a
personally owned laptop.  Students could also follow along on the course
website.  There were two dry erase boards attached to easels that needed to be
cleaned with isopropyl alcohol from my first aid kit.  There was a single dry
erase marker.

The AC units and fans did not keep the room cool, but cooler had they not been
present.  By the afternoon, I estimate the temperature was in the 80F+ with
high humidity.

**Recommend instructor cadre verify room condition and request/bring additional
supplies as appropriate.**
